# What is the Enigma Protocol and how does it work?

> “We’ve been solving for privacy and scalability since 2015, before many knew what blockchain was and could be… Enigma is one of the most ambitious and critical projects in the decentralization space — the missing piece to realizing a decentralized, more sustainable future.”
>- Guy Zyskind, Enigma CEO and co-founder

[Enigma](https://enigma.co) is building a privacy layer for the decentralized web. First researched at MIT, **_Enigma’s network of “secret nodes” can perform computations over encrypted data at scale_** without ever exposing the raw data itself. By finally enabling decentralized applications to use private and sensitive data, smart contracts built with Enigma become “[secret contracts](https://blog.enigma.co/defining-secret-contracts-f40ddee67ef2)”, allowing developers to create thousands of new, valuable solutions.

[Blockchains are bad at privacy by design](https://blog.coinmarketcap.com/2018/10/09/privacy-for-blockchains-an-introduction/) — and as a result, traditional smart contracts suffer from significant limitations. They cannot use data that needs to be kept confidential. **Enigma is building the first scalable platform for decentralized applications that can utilize sensitive or private data as inputs.** Secret contracts unlock the enormous potential of dApps and can revolutionize industries like finance, credit, gaming, machine learning, healthcare, and many others that depend on the use of sensitive data. They also help swing the balance of power over data back to the individual.

How does it work? Enigma's [protocol](https://blog.enigma.co/developers) breaks up sensitive data and distributes it in encrypted form across nodes on the Enigma network. Nodes can then use this data to perform computations without seeing or exposing the raw data itself. As Enigma thus solves for scalability in addition to providing data privacy, **we believe that the first decentralized applications with millions of users will be built on Enigma — and that Enigma is the critical missing piece to a decentralized future.**

Enigma was first described in 2015 in our CEO and co-founder Guy Zyskind’s [MIT thesis](https://enigma.co/enigma_full.pdf) as a follow-up to his foundational whitepaper, “Decentralizing Privacy”. These two groundbreaking papers on privacy and blockchains are now some of the most highly cited in the space, with over 500 combined citations. **We are proud to have been the first project to recognize the essential nature of privacy solutions to the success of decentralization —** and we’re proud to continue leading this critical effort. These whitepapers were also early arguments for separating verification (consensus) and computation as a scalability solution