# Role and Utility of ENG
The ENG token is critical to the function of the Enigma network, playing two primary roles: as payment for computation and as a requirement for staking. Critical networks like Enigma are made possible by the existence of utility tokens like ENG that serve as an alignment mechanism. Below we provide more detail on the ENG token and its utility within our network.
Primary role of ENG: paying for computations in the Enigma Protocol
The primary function of ENG in the Enigma protocol is to pay for computations, very similar to the function of Gas (ether) in the Ethereum network. When an application runs a secret contract on the Enigma network, end users who interact with the application (or the entity that deployed the application) has to spend ENG to get the computation done in a privacy-preserving way. Let’s go over a simple example to better illustrate the point:
We are currently working with Datawallet to solve one of the biggest problems in the blockchain space: sybil prevention. Datawallet has algorithms that determine whether a user is a real person or a bot, using her Facebook data. Currently the algorithms run locally, which means that Datawallet has access to the user data. By using the Enigma network, Datawallet can run this same algorithm as a secret contract. The sensitive user data would now be an encrypted input to the decentralized Enigma network, instead of a data feed to a centralized server. In this case, the user would pay ENG to run the secret contract that determines whether she’s a bot or not. This would be useful for a user trying to participate in a fundraising event or participate in a competition/game.
Secondary role of ENG: staking for secret and consensus nodes
As mentioned previously, the Enigma network utilizes a multi-tiered ENG staking system (secret nodes and consensus nodes). In this system, the more tokens a secret node stakes, the more likely she is to be selected to work on the next secret contract. Nodes acquire and stake ENG to increase their chance of running secret contracts and thus earning a return on their stake.
Here is an oversimplified example to better illustrate this point:
If there are 2 secret nodes both staking 10,000 ENG, their odds of working on the next secret contract is 50–50. If worker 1 is staking 1,000 and worker 2 is staking 9,000, then worker 1 has 10% chance of working on the next secret contract.
As you can see, staking ENG is essential to the healthy functioning and growth of the Enigma network.